Minimal os research (#26)
fobnail/docs: dev-notes/minimal-os-for-fobnail.md

owner to verify the trustworthiness of the running system before performing any
sensitive operation.

According to the information provided at TrenchBoot Summit 2021 (the fragment
discussed here - https://youtu.be/xZoCtNV8Qs0?t=5062), the minimum OS, together
with the connected Fobnail Token, should allow determining the state of the
platform before the target OS is launched. As we can see in the presentation,
`heads` would be responsible for the platform's trust control, while in this
document, we want to present the results of research on the possibilities of
using various operating systems.

## Different OSs propositions

The research effect is presented below. 4 systems were considered:

* Zephyr
* Xous
* seL4
* Linux

Each of them has a short description, an analysis of the launch in DLME, and the
possibilities and potential problems that will have to be addressed for the
Fobnail Token to be functional.

### Zephyr

Zephyr is a well-known and supported embedded RTOS with a monolithic kernel
written in C. It supports various devices ranging from Cortex-M to x86 CPUs and
provides support for IPv4, CoAP, and USB needed for communication with Fobnail
Token.

#### Running in DLME

> Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL

Reviewer: What is SKL? I know but reader would be confused, shall we link to TrenchBoot documentation where this is explained?

> Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL

Author: @pietrushnic @TomaszAIR I extended explanation and added brief explanation what SKL is.

> Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 from my perspective it is ok, but still we need table with requirements in a way suggested on Dasharo - Fobnail Matrix channel. I'm leaving resolution of this discussion to @TomaszAIR

> Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL

Reviewer 2: Table added, we tried to realize it as suggested on Dasharo - Fobnail Matrix channel

> Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL

Reviewer: Yes, I know you working on that, so it is ok to resolve that one.

`CONFIG_LOAPIC_BASE_ADDRESS`, if `IA32_APIC_BASE` MSR doesn't match, Zephyr will
break. The same thing for xAPIC vs x2APIC mode. If Zephyr was configured to use
xAPIC mode, it might not boot on a platform with x2APIC enabled in its firmware.

#### Fobnail integration

Zephyr provides most of the drivers needed for integration:

- USB hub drivers
- USB EEM driver
- Network stack with IPv4 and CoAP support

TPM driver is missing, however there is a fairly recent
[PoC implementation](https://github.com/drandreas/zephyr-tpm2-poc) of TPM2
stack.

Zephyr provides good support for standard C library (newlib), which should
simplify [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
porting.

### Xous

Xous is a microkernel-based OS written in Rust, currently in Alpha state. Xous
is used as a secure microkernel for [Betrusted](betrusted.io) device and is
focused on RISC-V, which right now is the only architecture supported. However,
x86 already contains
[dummy implementation](https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/blob/30b82b25b100e958790973c129dc49e1acca79ec/kernel/src/arch/x86_64.rs)
which probably will be extended someday.

#### Running in DLME

> Xous currently cannot run on x86, and DLME on RISC-V is not covered here.

Reviewer 2: @arturkow2000 So there is no way to run RISC-V arch in DLME?

Author: @TomaszAIR Probably it is but I don't know how to do it.

Reviewer 2: @arturkow2000 we could submit an issue in Xous community as mentioned here https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26#discussion_r855083920

Reviewer 2: issue submitted https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/issues/139

wouldn't compromise entire OS contrary to monolithic kernels.

#### Running in DLME

seL4 is a secure L4 family microkernel written in C. It has strong security
guarantees assured by [Formal proofs](https://sel4.systems/Info/FAQ/proof.pml).
However, these proofs are still incomplete for x86, see
[Supported Platforms](https://docs.sel4.systems/Hardware) for an up-to-date
verification status. seL4, due to its microkernel nature, provides higher
isolation. A breach in one of the components (like USB driver, network stack)
wouldn't compromise the entire OS, contrary to monolithic kernels.

#### Fobnail integration

seL4 provides virtually no drivers, except a few drivers listed here.
According to the page linked above, `libusbdrivers` is inactive and lacks XHCI
support. seL4 has basic support for an old version of musl C library (v1.1.16).

Using seL4 would require a significant amount of work:
- Extending USB drivers
- Implementing USB EEM driver
- Implementing TPM driver
- Porting [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
- seL4 runs all processes in unprivileged mode, so the kernel itself would have
  to be modified to allow booting of another kernel

> [Genode](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode) can run on seL4 and provides

Reviewer 2: @arturkow2000 can we add an explanation what genode is?

Author: @TomaszAIR added

# Minimal OS for Fobnail project

The Fobnail project aims to provide a reference architecture for building
offline integrity measurement servers on the USB device and clients running in
Dynamically Launched Measured Environments (DLME). It should allow the Fobnail
owner to verify the trustworthiness of the running system before performing any

> sensitive operation.

Reviewer: What do you think about description of the project, which I proposed [here](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/29/files#diff-b4d68dc855d0f9476d3f2ee343853bd21bf82ea9960d0cf06661baa244439dd6R3) ?

Also do we really have to repeat that intro, maybe we should just refer to index or detailed description?

> According to the information provided at TrenchBoot Summit 2021 (the fragment
> discussed here - https://youtu.be/xZoCtNV8Qs0?t=5062), the minimum OS, together

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the information presented at TrenchBoot Summit 2021 [Fobnail: Attestation in Your Pocket](https://youtu.be/xZoCtNV8Qs0?t=5062), the minimum OS, together
```

@TomaszAIR please wrap accordingly

Author: Done

with the connected Fobnail Token, should allow determining the state of the

> platform before the target OS is launched. As we can see in the presentation,

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR this is early launch example, in future we plan to do late launch implementation, what IMO is important to mention. Both early launch and late launch use cases were discussed many times on various occasions:
- https://youtu.be/pZF-jyJWTE4

Also I see no reason why Fobnail couldn't attest SRTM: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eip5Rts6S2I

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR I would like you to:
* [ ] distinguish between early launch and late launch - maybe TrenchBoot documentation or friends from EFT would be helpful
* [ ] mention that current approach is about early launch and late launch is for future improvements
* [ ] mention that not only DRTM PCRs can be attested but also SRTM PCRs, but for the purpose of DLME OS selection we care only about DRTM PCRs attestation by Fobnail, why it is important? Because without DLME OS we can have some weak claims  about platform state based on SRTM PCRs, this should be clear for the reader

Reviewer 2: Thank you, that's helpful. We will address that.

Author: @pietrushnic I addressed two first points.
Regarding the third point, we are actually attesting both SRTM and DRTM, however that could be easily changed.

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 policy should determine that.

Author: @pietrushnic It is already determined by policy, but policy is hardcoded currently.

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 and that is fine, we just need internal plan for customizable policies. Do we have one?

Author: @pietrushnic We do plan to implement it, but we don't have any plan how it should be implemented.

Reviewer 3: Related issue: https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-platform-owner/issues/3

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 agree. Plan have to be created and issue pointed by @krystian-hebel can be linked in documentation as point where we will try to create plan. Or maybe we need dedicated issues just for customizable policies with above issue mentioned as related.

Reviewer: choose what works for you better

`heads` would be responsible for the platform's trust control, while in this
document, we want to present the results of research on the possibilities of

> using various operating systems.

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR let's link to explanation what heads is. Also, we kind of missing the goal here. Heads is payload/bootloader before running OS, but what we should explore is OS running as DLME. Heads will not be running as DLME, although we may consider that, and it would be useful exercise since Heads is nothing then LinuxBoot with different user space (busybox IIUC). Am I missing something?

Author: I linked to theirs repo

Reviewer: Yes

## Different OSs propositions

The research effect is presented below. 4 systems were considered:

* Zephyr
* Xous
* seL4

> * Linux

Reviewer: Linux could be considered here in various forms:
- Heads (busybox user space)
- LinuxBoot (Go user space)
- Linux + Yocto built user space :thinking: ?

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic would you like those options also be analyzed in this report? In similar way to Linux + Yocto that we already present?

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR yes, especially that those can be also viable options and we may use this report for extending scope of the project in future if needed.

Author: @pietrushnic I added Busybox and Go sections

Each of them has a short description, an analysis of the launch in DLME, and the
possibilities and potential problems that will have to be addressed for the
Fobnail Token to be functional.

> ### Zephyr

Reviewer: It would be way better to have table based comparison in light of all known Fobnail Project requirements. Ideally we should say about requirements in short here, but there should be documentation which explain each requirement in more details. Those requirements should be user visible features not developers requirements. @macpijan cc

Reviewer 2: The breakdown of this report is as follows. In the introduction (section OS requirements), we indicate the hard and soft req that we take into account. Then we briefly describe each OS in a separate section. Finally, we summarize once again all the requirements in the table.

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR yes, after recent improvements' layout is way better, so I will resolve that and wait until @dpsmith suggestions would be implemented.

Zephyr is a well-known and supported embedded RTOS with a monolithic kernel
written in C. It supports various devices ranging from Cortex-M to x86 CPUs and
provides support for IPv4, CoAP, and USB needed for communication with Fobnail

> Token.

Reviewer: What are the benefits of Zephyr? Mayb let's link: https://www.zephyrproject.org/benefits/

Author: @pietrushnic done

> #### Running in DLME

Reviewer: I see you get it right, but we should be straight about that from the beginning of the document.

Zephyr boots over Multiboot1, but SKL supports only Muliboot2, so either SKL
must be extended to gain Multiboot1 support or Zephyr to gain Multiboot2. Also,
Zephyr is not portable - some important configuration is baked into Zephyr
during build, like LAPIC base address - the base address is set by
`CONFIG_LOAPIC_BASE_ADDRESS`, if `IA32_APIC_BASE` MSR doesn't match, Zephyr will
break. The same thing for xAPIC vs x2APIC mode. If Zephyr was configured to use

> xAPIC mode, it might not boot on a platform with x2APIC enabled in its firmware.

Reviewer: Information have to be presented in structured way e.g. bullet points, table. Best way would be to present it in light of Fobnail Project requirements. Here we have trash of everything, how to get any conclusion from that?

Author: @pietrushnic done

TPM driver is missing, however there is a fairly recent
[PoC implementation](https://github.com/drandreas/zephyr-tpm2-poc) of TPM2
stack.

Zephyr provides good support for standard C library (newlib), which should
simplify [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
porting.

### Xous

Xous is a microkernel-based OS written in Rust, currently in Alpha state. Xous
is used as a secure microkernel for [Betrusted](betrusted.io) device and is
focused on RISC-V, which right now is the only architecture supported. However,
x86 already contains
[dummy implementation](https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/blob/30b82b25b100e958790973c129dc49e1acca79ec/kernel/src/arch/x86_64.rs)
which probably will be extended someday.

#### Running in DLME

Xous currently cannot run on x86, and DLME on RISC-V is not covered here.

#### Fobnail integration

Xous has network support but currently lacks USB host drivers and TPM support.
Also, it lacks C interface for calling the kernel and lacks C library. Getting
[fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) running may
require a significant amount of work. Also, Xous needs to gain kexec-like

> abilities to chainload target OS.

Reviewer: Please submit issue to Xous and let them know we consider this OS as DLME, even if it would not happen in this Fobnail Project it may be of value for people in future, also Xous project members review would be vrey valuable.

Author: Submitted: https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/issues/139

> ### seL4

Reviewer: Please reach seL4 community and let them know we consider use of the project, maybe some information can be improved here.

Author: Submitted https://github.com/seL4/seL4/issues/832

Reviewer 2: submitted and added to the report

Reviewer: Thanks!

seL4 is a secure L4 family microkernel written in C. It has strong security
guarantees assured by [Formal proofs](https://sel4.systems/Info/FAQ/proof.pml),
however these proofs are still incomplete for x86, see
[Supported Platforms](https://docs.sel4.systems/Hardware) for an up-to-date
verification status. seL4 due to its microkernel nature provides higher
isolation, breach in one of the components (like USB driver, network stack)
wouldn't compromise entire OS contrary to monolithic kernels.

#### Running in DLME

seL4 is a secure L4 family microkernel written in C. It has strong security
guarantees assured by [Formal proofs](https://sel4.systems/Info/FAQ/proof.pml).
However, these proofs are still incomplete for x86, see
[Supported Platforms](https://docs.sel4.systems/Hardware) for an up-to-date
verification status. seL4, due to its microkernel nature, provides higher
isolation. A breach in one of the components (like USB driver, network stack)

> wouldn't compromise the entire OS, contrary to monolithic kernels.

Reviewer 4: Same as the section above?

Author: @marmarek Got it accidentially corrupted, I fixed that.

#### Fobnail integration

seL4 provides virtually no drivers, except a few drivers listed here.
According to the page linked above, `libusbdrivers` is inactive and lacks XHCI
support. seL4 has basic support for an old version of musl C library (v1.1.16).

Using seL4 would require a significant amount of work:
- Extending USB drivers
- Implementing USB EEM driver
- Implementing TPM driver
- Porting [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
- seL4 runs all processes in unprivileged mode, so the kernel itself would have
  to be modified to allow booting of another kernel

[Genode](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode) can run on seL4 and provides
drivers, at least for some devices and a network stack. Its support for seL4
used to be incomplete, and many components were broken. However, that might have

> changed, and Genode may be an easier way to get software running on seL4.

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR @arturkow2000 I already reached Sid asking him about review, but maybe asking Genode community would be also good idea. At some point we supported them also, so maybe asking for this small favor would be ok.

Author: https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/issues/4480

Reviewer 2: added and mentioned in report

### Linux

In the case of Linux, a minimal distribution will be prepared that meets the
requirements of the project. [Yocto Project](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) will
be used for this, because it gives a lot of freedom in manipulating the elements

> that make up the target system.

Reviewer: I would appreciate comparative analysis based on available user space.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic IIUC you would like an analysis between

* Heads (busybox user space)
* LinuxBoot (Go user space)
* Linux + Yocto built user space
* https://github.com/littlekernel/lk
* https://nv-tegra.nvidia.com/r/admin/repos/3rdparty/ote_partner/tlk

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR no, Heads, LinuxBoot and Linux+Yocto are essentially the same but something else built its user space. I think it does matter.

lk and tlk are different thing, @dpsmith may give here a reason behind that, but essentially those kernels are shipped massively, so it means good marketing exposure, potential support of big org, big community backed by commercial vendor etc.

Reviewer: lk, tlk seem to be Zephyr competitions in our analysis. I think Zephyr is good since it is base for LibreBMC and new EC for Intel platforms.

Reviewer 5: To clarify, lk is what AOSP/Android bootloader is based on and fixes tend to flow back up to lk. Whereas tlk is a fork of lk by Nvidia to be used as the TEE OS on Arm platform. Google created a derivative of lk which everyone knows as Fuchsia, is a capability-based general operating system. IMHO would consider Fuchsia more of a competitor to Zephyr, while lk is a more lower-level kernel kit.

Reviewer 6: @TomaszAIR Can you include seL4 + CAmkES and/or seL4 Core Platform?

Reviewer 3: > I think Zephyr is good since it is base for LibreBMC and new EC for Intel platforms.

Sorry but I fail to see the connection. Do we plan to attest BMC or EC with Fobnail?

Reviewer 2: @DemiMarie we will include seL4 + CAmkES and seL4 Core Platform. Thank you for your input

Author: @dpsmith I added LK and Fuchsia sections, would you take a look at that?

Author: @DemiMarie I added CAmkES section, would you take a look at that?
I focused on CAmkES abilities to run VMs. CAmkES doesn't provide any drivers by itself, so the main advantage would be easier component writing.

seL4 Core Platform lags behind CAmkES in terms of completenes. sCP currently has no x86 support, also development is slow, if not halted.

Author: @DemiMarie Would take a look at that? Can we close this thread?

Reviewer 6: Sure

Reviewer 2: Great, thanks

#### Running in DLME

Ensuring that the operating system works in DLME can be achieved by using the
[TrenchBoot](https://trenchboot.org/) project. For this purpose, a Yocto
[meta-fobnail](https://github.com/fobnail/meta-fobnail) layer has been created
that integrates the necessary elements. The effects of the tests are presented
in a [separate document](./running-os-in-dlme.md).

#### Fobnail integration

At this point, the [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
application is strongly dependent on Linux. Mainly due to the fact that its
development took place on this operating system. Therefore, it is important that
the created minimal OS also has an integrated attester application. The main
dependencies of its operation are drivers for USB, USB EEM and TPM, but running
them under Linux will not cause major problems.

## PoC test

Running DLME requires GRUB from TrenchBoot as mainline doesn't have DLME
support. During PoC we use GRUB from

> [here](https://github.com/3mdeb/grub/tree/tb_xen).

Reviewer: We know GRUB2 maintainer so why we don't ask, when things will change?

Reviewer: According to Daniel we are stuck with discussion how TrenchBoot should be implemented in Linux kernel. Unless this is solved no investment in TrenchBoot GRUB2 implementation would be made.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic thanks. @arturkow2000 please, lets mention that in this report.

Author: Added

  only when using
  [Multiboot2](https://github.com/3mdeb/grub/blob/tb_xen/grub-core/loader/multiboot.c#L192)
  but Zephyr has support only for Multiboot1.

- Booting Zephyr in DLME would require updating `slaunch` support in GRUB and
  bringing Multiboot1 support to SKL.

## Summary

* The above report outlines four operating systems that should be considered
  candidates for Fobnail Token interoperability.

* The basic choice is Linux, the operating system based on it is created with
  the use of Yocto Project. All achievements can be reproduced at any time using
  the [meta-fobnail](https://github.com/fobnail/meta-fobnail) layer.

* As part of the report, the seL4, Xous and Zephyr systems were also checked.
  The possibility of running it in DLME and the integration of the
  [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) application
  was checked for each of them.

* The description of an attempt to run Zephyr on PC Engines apu2 in order to
  verify the current state of the system to work with Fobnail Token has been
  included. The effects are described in the [PoC test](#poc-test) section.

* The table below summarises all OSes features.

> | OS      | USB host driver  | USB EEM driver   | Network stack | TPM driver    | OS portability | Bootloader capabilities |

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 do we have more robust description of those requirements, maybe those can be links to document section?

Reviewer 5: Consider a brief explanation of why this requirement is needed. This may not be true from some, but consider if there are alternatives that would make it possible for an OS to meet the objective. You may also want to put a (+1) next to Yes, a (0) next to No, and a (-1) next to things like PoC available and Limited. Then provide a final column of "Score" where you tally up values. This will give a simple metric to consider in the selection. You may want to also consider if there are any other properties of an OS that may not be required to work with fobnail but provides an enhancement or capability that is desirable for the project.

Reviewer 2: @dpsmith thanks. We tried to implement your suggestion. The table at the end present the scores and `OS requirements section` at the beginning explain which requirements we take into account and how scores are given.

Author: @pietrushnic I added "OS requirements" section. Does it solve this thread?

[Fobnail: Attestation in Your Pocket](https://youtu.be/xZoCtNV8Qs0?t=5062),
the minimum OS, together with the connected Fobnail Token, should allow
determining the state of the platform before the target OS is launched. As we
can see in the presentation, [heads](https://github.com/osresearch/heads) would
be responsible for the platform's trust control, while in this document, we want
to present the results of research on the possibilities of using various
operating systems.

## OS requirements

We pay attention to the drivers supported by each OS. We need the following
drivers:

- TPM drivers
- Drivers required for communicating with Fobnail Token
  - USB host drivers - at minimum EHCI and xHCI support, however UHCI and OHCI
    would be good to have
  - USB EEM driver - emulated Ethernet driver
  - Network stack with IPv4 support

Also we pay attention to OS security, ability to run in DLME, including
portability beetween different hardware (a single binary should be able to boot
on all x86 platforms with support for ACPI) and ability to chainload another,
target OS.

The table below summarises OS features which are a hard requirement, though they
could be implemented by us.

> | Requirement             | Description                                                        |

Reviewer 3: What about ability/ease of obtaining platform metadata?

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 I think this is very important requirement, best it would be if we can even test availability of libraries/tools for such purpose. @krystian-hebel thanks, I think this is very good point.

@dpsmith thoughts?

Author: @krystian-hebel @pietrushnic Right now obtaining metadata would be problematic on any non-Linux OS because we need to obtain MAC of network adapter. So we virtually need a driver for each possible network card.

Reviewer: Are we sure, that MAC is necessary for hardware identification? What will happen for routers with multiple NICs?

Author: > Are we sure, that MAC is necessary for hardware identification

IMO we don't need it. EK cert hash together with platform metadata could be used for identification.

> What will happen for routers with multiple NICs?

That wouldn't cause problems, we only take MAC of the first network adapter. [here](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/blob/main/dev-notes/metadata.md#mac-address) we describe how determine which NIC is first.

Author: @pietrushnic

IMO we should drop requirement for MAC address. We can't provide drivers for each possible NIC as OS wouldn't be minimal anymore.

I spoke with @krystian-hebel and we could use AIK loaded key name instead of MAC.

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 sure, let's not use MAC. I believe I suggested I don't exactly like MAC for hardware identification.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic @arturkow2000 So I believe that not using MAC should be added to the TODO list. What about the opening topic of this thread? Shouldn't we add such a requirement?

Reviewer: Agree with adding MAC dependency removal to TODO. Other questions should be addressed by @krystian-hebel since he is OP here.

Reviewer 3: I think original question is answered as portability.

Reviewer: @krystian-hebel you mean adding requirement of portability to Fobnail Project? Of course, it has to be defined, but could be handled in v2 of this document or in other relevant one.

  then -1
- If this is a hard requirement then multiple result by 2

## Different OSs propositions

The research effect is presented below. 4 systems were considered:

* Zephyr
* Xous
* seL4
* Linux

Each of them has a short description, an analysis of the launch in DLME, and the
possibilities and potential problems that will have to be addressed for the
Fobnail Token to be functional.

### Zephyr

Zephyr is a well-known and supported embedded RTOS with a monolithic kernel
written in C. It supports various devices ranging from Cortex-M to x86 CPUs.
It's main benefits are IPv4, CoAP, and USB (including USB EEM) support which are
required for communication with Fobnail token. Other benefits are listed
[here](https://www.zephyrproject.org/benefits/).

#### Running in DLME

Secure launch uses a component called
[SKL](https://github.com/TrenchBoot/secure-kernel-loader) (Secure Kernel Loader)
which is responsible for booting OS in DLME (Zephyr in that case). Zephyr boots
using Multiboot1 but SKL does not support it (only Multiboot2 is supported). For
SKL to be able to boot Zephyr, either Zephyr would have to support Multiboot2 or

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 6: SKL _will_ need to measure the ACPI tables, as real-world OSs _do_ trust them.  In particular, I am not sure if one can practically set up the IOMMU in a secure way without them.  @andyhhp thoughts?

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 3: ACPI is not needed to _start_ OS, as opposed to e.g. command line or load address of the kernel, which are also spread all around the memory in MB1. OS can measure ACPI by itself, if it chooses to use it.

> SKL Multiboot1.

Author: @krystian-hebel
> ACPI is not needed to start OS, as opposed to e.g. command line or load address of the kernel, which are also spread all around the memory in MB1.

Don't we need ACPI for setting up interrupts and timer for task scheduler, and locating PCIe to which USB controller is connected?

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 3: Not in SKL.

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 7: > SKL _will_ need to measure the ACPI tables, as real-world OSs _do_ trust them. In particular, I am not sure if one can practically set up the IOMMU in a secure way without them. @andyhhp thoughts?

SKL can't set up the IOMMU securely if it trusts the APCI tables.  Still TODO is how to figure out correct IOMMU settings **without** trusting the firmware we're about to evict from the system.

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 6: @andyhhp does this mean that whatever kernel is chosen for SKL will need to be patched to do IOMMU setup properly?

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 6: > The reality is that there is a need to have a comparable solution as Intel TXT. There, the ACM is sets up the PMRs and generate a sanitized set of core ACPI tables. IIRC, AMD IOMMU does not have any concept of PMRs and relies on ACPI info along with cmd buffer + doorbell, which are susceptible to TOCTOU situations, to confiugre the IOMMU.

Looks like the only option is Intel TXT + protected runtime mechanism.

> SKL Multiboot1.

Author: @krystian-hebel I added note about multiboot1

> SKL Multiboot1.

Reviewer 2: @krystian-hebel could you please take a look? Can we resolve this thread?

Also, Zephyr may have trouble with running on different hardware configurations.
Some important HW-related configuration is baked into Zephyr during build:

- LAPIC base is selected by `CONFIG_LOAPIC_BASE_ADDRESS`, if target platform has
  LAPIC remapped using `IA32_APIC_BASE` Zephyr will break.

- APIC mode (xAPIC vs x2APIC) is selected when building Zephyr and cannot be
  detected at runtime. Zephyr may not boot if it has different APIC mode set
  than firmware has.

#### Fobnail integration

Zephyr provides most of the drivers needed for integration:

- USB hub drivers
- USB EEM driver
- Network stack with IPv4 and CoAP support

TPM driver is missing, however there is a fairly recent

> [PoC implementation](https://github.com/drandreas/zephyr-tpm2-poc) of TPM2

Reviewer 3: AFAICT SPI only, for embedded devices, which may not help with implementing it on TPM exposed as compatible with PC Client specification. Still better than nothing, I guess...

Author: @krystian-hebel I added a note

Reviewer 2: @krystian-hebel can we resolve this thread?

stack.

Zephyr provides good support for standard C library (newlib), which should
simplify [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
porting.

### Xous

Xous is a microkernel-based OS written in Rust, currently in Alpha state. Xous
is used as a secure microkernel for [Betrusted](betrusted.io) device and is
focused on RISC-V, which right now is the only architecture supported. However,
x86 already contains
[dummy implementation](https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/blob/30b82b25b100e958790973c129dc49e1acca79ec/kernel/src/arch/x86_64.rs)
which probably will be extended someday.

#### Running in DLME

Xous currently cannot run on x86, and DLME on RISC-V is not covered here. We
have opened an [issue](https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/issues/139)
raising the subject, among others, about x86 support.

#### Fobnail integration

Xous has network support but currently lacks USB host drivers and TPM support.

> Also, it lacks C interface for calling the kernel and lacks C library. Getting

Reviewer 6: This is not a serious problem because one can either write the userland code in Rust (preferred) or write C bindings to the Rust code.

Reviewer 2: @DemiMarie Thank you, we've made some corrections. Can you please resolve this thread?

Reviewer 2: I allowed myself to resolve this thread as it contained a minor change

[fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) running may
require a significant amount of work. Also, Xous needs to gain kexec-like
abilities to chainload target OS.

### seL4

seL4 is a secure L4 family microkernel written in C. It has strong security

> guarantees assured by [Formal proofs](https://sel4.systems/Info/FAQ/proof.pml),
> however these proofs are still incomplete for x86, see

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
guarantees assured by [formal proofs](https://sel4.systems/Info/FAQ/proof.pml).
However these proofs are still incomplete for x86; see
```

(Grammar nit)

Reviewer 2: @DemiMarie Thanks! We committed those minor fixes. Let me close this thread.

[Supported Platforms](https://docs.sel4.systems/Hardware) for an up-to-date

> verification status. seL4 due to its microkernel nature provides higher
> isolation, breach in one of the components (like USB driver, network stack)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
verification status. Due to its microkernel nature, seL4 provides stronger
isolation. A breach in one of the components (such as a USB driver or the network stack)
```

Reviewer 2: @DemiMarie Thanks! We committed those minor fixes. Let me close this thread.

> wouldn't compromise entire OS contrary to monolithic kernels.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
wouldn't compromise the entire OS (contrary to monolithic kernels).
```

unprivileged mode which complicates booting of the target OS. seL4 would have to
gain kexec-like abilities.

#### Fobnail integration

seL4 provides virtually no drivers, except a few drivers listed here.
According to the page linked above, `libusbdrivers` is inactive and lacks XHCI
support. seL4 has basic support for an old version of musl C library (v1.1.16).

Using seL4 would require a significant amount of work:
- Extending USB drivers
- Implementing USB EEM driver
- Implementing TPM driver
- Porting [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
- seL4 runs all processes in unprivileged mode, so the kernel itself would have
  to be modified to allow booting of another kernel

[Genode](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode) is an framework for creating
custom, specialized OSes. It provides USB drivers (including `usb-net` driver
from which should handle USB EEM) and a network stack. Its support for seL4 used
to be incomplete, and many components were broken. However, that might have
changed, and Genode may be an easier way to get software running on seL4. We
have opened an [issue](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/issues/4480) here

> too.

Reviewer 8: @pietrushnic asked me to review this PR. Disclaimer: I'm not affiliated with Genodelabs. However, we at Gapfruit have been working with the Genode Framework for almost a decade. In my view, Genode is highly under-appreciated. So let me try to sum up why I believe Genode deserves a more prominent role in this document than merely a sub-section of seL4. Genode is a framework to design component-based scenarios - or whole operating systems - on top of various microkernels. Every component is strongly isolated and only gets access to resources and services in an explicit manner. The microkernel guarantees strong isolation and maintains access control to various resources via capability objects. 

The system designer defines the component topology in a declarative and nested manner - making it possible to abstract sub-systems while maintaining the possibility to define fine-grained trust relationships between the components. 

One example scenario that illustrates this topology quite well is the [lighttpd](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/blob/master/repos/ports/run/lighttpd.run) run script. This script creates a static boot image with only the necessary components to serve a webpage with lighttpd: `timer`, `nic_drv`, `nic_router`, and `lighttpd`. This run script works (mostly) out of the box with different kernels (seL4, nova, base-hw, linux etc) on different hardware (ARM, x86, RISC-V). This example illustrates quite well what a component topology for the fobnail project could look like. It also demonstrates the possibility of porting POSIX components to their FreeBSD-based libc port.

While the lighttpd run script shows how a static scenario can look like, more dynamic systems like the [Sulpt OS](https://genode.org/documentation/articles/sculpt-21-10) or the headless Gapfruit OS are possible. 

Regarding drivers, I believe that most required drivers already work (USB host driver, USB NIC driver, ACPI etc). We at Gapfruit also have ported WolfTPM, which we haven't open-sourced yet.

One missing requirement is the possibility to `kexec` from a Genode scenario to another operating system. That would be a great research topic. I can see two intermediate solutions until then:
- On x86_64 Genode has ported VirtualBox on top of the nova micro-hypervisor.
- When running a Genode scenario on Linux, each component is isolated with Seccomp and the capability objects are represented with file-descriptors. This would make it possible to create a minimal Linux kernel that would kexec the main OS after a successful integrity check.

Reviewer 6: What advantage does Genode have over CAmkES?  Genode seems like a poor choice for a static system like this.

Reviewer 8: > What advantage does Genode have over CAmkES? 

It's been a while since I played with CAmkES, so my judgment might be outdated. However, from an engineering perspective, I would say Genode is way ahead in terms of tooling, supported drivers, supported driver environments, supported runtimes, hardware, and maturity.

> Genode seems like a poor choice for a static system like this.

How so? In the beginning, Genode was static as well. On Genode, you don't pay for what you don't use. That also counts for _not_ using the dynamic features of Genode. Do you mean from a security perspective? On paper, SeL4 + CAmkES indeed sounds compelling. Formal verification _does_ make a strong argument. IMHO Genode takes a more reasonable approach. The declarative service topology makes it possible to identify the components that are critical to the system. These vital components can then be made as resilient and safe as possible - using various techniques such as formal verification, static analysis, fuzzing, profiling, safe languages, etc. Obviously, the kernel _is_ critical. But so are e.g. multiplexers or components that have access to secrets (similar to split GPG in Qubes). 

From a marketing perspective, the formal verification argument might make sense. In this regard, it is worth considering the Nova hypervisor for x86_64. AFAIK Nova is also partly formally verified. 

What I forgot to mention: On x86_64, using Genode combined with Nova, IOMMU-protection is fully implemented and running in production.

That said, I may don't see all requirements and implications of using Genode for this project. CAmkES may very well be the best option. And, from my perspective, definitely better than some of the other alternatives mentioned in this document. 

@DemiMarie I'm eager to learn why you think CAmkES is a better fit than Genode.

Reviewer 6: > > What advantage does Genode have over CAmkES?
> 
> It's been a while since I played with CAmkES, so my judgment might be outdated. However, from an engineering perspective, I would say Genode is way ahead in terms of tooling, supported drivers, supported driver environments, supported runtimes, hardware, and maturity.

That does not surprise me, though the seL4 Core Platform might be better once it is implemented.

> > Genode seems like a poor choice for a static system like this.
> 
> How so? In the beginning, Genode was static as well. On Genode, you don't pay for what you don't use. That also counts for _not_ using the dynamic features of Genode.

I was not aware of this.

> Do you mean from a security perspective?

That is where basically all of my arguments come from, so yes.  I have never used any of these frameworks myself.

> On paper, SeL4 + CAmkES indeed sounds compelling. Formal verification _does_ make a strong argument. IMHO Genode takes a more reasonable approach. The declarative service topology makes it possible to identify the components that are critical to the system. These vital components can then be made as resilient and safe as possible - using various techniques such as formal verification, static analysis, fuzzing, profiling, safe languages, etc. Obviously, the kernel _is_ critical. But so are e.g. multiplexers or components that have access to secrets (similar to split GPG in Qubes).

That is indeed the case.  In fact, this OS needs support for `kexec()`, so at least the root task will be as critical as the kernel.

> From a marketing perspective, the formal verification argument might make sense.

Why “from a marketing perspective”?  To me, formal verification is a substantial security win, though I would be interested to hear from others, such as yourself and @lsf37.

> In this regard, it is worth considering the Nova hypervisor for x86_64. AFAIK Nova is also partly formally verified.

Can you link to the proofs?

> What I forgot to mention: On x86_64, using Genode combined with Nova, IOMMU-protection is fully implemented and running in production.

That is a definite plus.  Is interrupt remapping included?

> That said, I may don't see all requirements and implications of using Genode for this project. CAmkES may very well be the best option. And, from my perspective, definitely better than some of the other alternatives mentioned in this document.

> @DemiMarie I'm eager to learn why you think CAmkES is a better fit than Genode.

A few reasons:

1. Genode’s licensing terms (AGPLv3 or commercial) may be a dealbreaker.  In particular, they are incompatible with the licenses of Heads and of Qubes OS.  Additionally, @pietrushnic might find the AGPLv3 too restrictive.  As this is an open source project, the commercial license is not applicable.
2. Genode does not have an assurance story, and AFIAK no intention of developing one.
3. Genode’s approach of abstracting the kernel in use seems like it would prevent using the full feature set of whatever kernel is chosen for the project.
4. My understanding is that Genode requires components to be written in C++, which is not a language I would choose here.  I could obviously be wrong about this, though.

Reviewer: In embedded realm anything containing *GPLv3 is no go.

Reviewer 8: > That is indeed the case. In fact, this OS needs support for kexec(), so at least the root task will be as critical as the kernel.

To avoid confusion, the `kexec` syscall would need to be implemented in kernel space e.g. SeL4. And there would be a user-space component that calls `kexec`. I assume that is the component that you referred to as root task. On Genode this component would probably be a hybrid component. More about that further down.

> Why “from a marketing perspective”? To me, formal verification is a substantial security win, though I would be interested to hear from others, such as yourself and @lsf37.

That is a bad choice of words from my side. I was wrong to start talking about marketing in this technical discussion. In no way do I want to discredit formal verification. I tried to formulate its value in the "security perspective" section above. Formal verification is just very expensive from an engineering perspective.

> > What I forgot to mention: On x86_64, using Genode combined with Nova, IOMMU-protection is fully implemented and running in production.

> That is a definite plus. Is interrupt remapping included?

Yes. AFAIK interrupts are remapped regardless of IOMMU protection: 
- https://genode.org/documentation/genode-foundations/21.05/architecture/Core_-_the_root_of_the_component_tree.html
- https://genode.org/documentation/genode-foundations/21.05/under_the_hood/Execution_on_the_NOVA_microhypervisor_(base-nova).html#IOMMU_support

> 1. Genode’s licensing terms (AGPLv3 or commercial) may be a dealbreaker. In particular, they are incompatible with the licenses of Heads and of Qubes OS. Additionally, @pietrushnic might find the AGPLv3 too restrictive. As this is an open source project, the commercial license is not applicable.

I understand how this might be a challenge.

> 2. Genode does not have an assurance story, and AFIAK no intention of developing one.

I don't understand what this means. Do you mean for a certification body?

> 3. Genode’s approach of abstracting the kernel in use seems like it would prevent using the full feature set of whatever kernel is chosen for the project.

You are correct. When developing Genode components, the abstractions you'd use are services, not syscalls. However, Genode has the notion of hybrid components, e.g., on Linux, to interact with the Linux filesystem: 
- https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/tree/master/repos/os/src/server/lx_fs

It seems like the only kernel feature missing for this project is `kexec`. For a rapid prototype using Linux as kernel, a hybrid component could issue this syscall. At the same time, other functionality such as integrity checks, TPM drivers, etc. are implemented as regular Genode components. Once, e.g., some form of `kexec` is available on SeL4 or NOVA, you'd only have to rewrite this specific hybrid component.

> 4. My understanding is that Genode requires components to be written in C++, which is not a language I would choose here. I could obviously be wrong about this, though.

Partly true. Most components are written in C++. However, they do not rely on any libc or stdlib. These libs are linked to the component only when needed. Critical components are designed to keep the TCB/LOC as low as possible and thus are written without these libs. More about the rationale behind this topic here: https://genodians.org/nfeske/2019-01-22-conscious-c++
Btw, ADA/SPARK is also supported. And there is an (abandoned) port for Rust.

Reviewer: @DemiMarie goal of this document is to make people aware of various options. We would also try to have rough evaluation of effort, for potential future sponsors information. If there will be enough interest in Genode as DLME OS, we definitely will be open for using it. I don't see Fobnail Project ecosystem as relying only on one DLME OS. 
AGPLv3 may be deal breaker for embedded environment, but maybe for other use cases this license is not an issue.

Author: @pietrushnic I updated Genode section.

Reviewer: @sidhussmann any chance you can look into that? From my perspective we gathered quite a lot of insights, but this conversation was started by you and I would like to make sure you are ok with closing it.

Reviewer 8: @pietrushnic I'm fine with the current state.

Reviewer 2: @sidhussmann thanks for confirmation. So I will resolve this thread.

Reviewer: @sidhussmann thank you for your contribution again. Feel free to reach us out when you will need our support.

### Linux

In the case of Linux, a minimal distribution will be prepared that meets the
requirements of the project. [Yocto Project](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) will
be used for this, because it gives a lot of freedom in manipulating the elements
that make up the target system.

#### Running in DLME

Ensuring that the operating system works in DLME can be achieved by using the
[TrenchBoot](https://trenchboot.org/) project. For this purpose, a Yocto
[meta-fobnail](https://github.com/fobnail/meta-fobnail) layer has been created
that integrates the necessary elements. The effects of the tests are presented
in a [separate document](./running-os-in-dlme.md).

#### Fobnail integration

At this point, the [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
application is strongly dependent on Linux. Mainly due to the fact that its
development took place on this operating system. Therefore, it is important that
the created minimal OS also has an integrated attester application. The main

> dependencies of its operation are drivers for USB, USB EEM and TPM, but running

Reviewer 6: It would be substantially simpler to use USB directly rather than tunneling TCP/IP over it.

Reviewer 6: > `s/TCP/UDP/;s/TLS/DTLS/`

Code that relies on UDP to provide reliable, in-order delivery (as yours does) is already non-portable, and in fact is likely to be broken as drops can still take place in e.g. the network stack’s internal buffers.  If you are going to go with this approach I suggest using TLS over USB, which is perfectly valid as TLS is transport-agnostic.

Author: @DemiMarie We have some basic reliability layer which should handle lost packets and out of order delivery, however it hasn't been tested much.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we have more to add here. @DemiMarie can we resolve this conversation? I am asking because it was started by you.

Reviewer 2: I appreciate that, thank you.

  ```shell
  (docker)$ ./bootstrap
  (docker)$ mkdir ../grub-install build
  (docker)$ cd build
  (docker)$ env CC=gcc-5 CFLAGS=-Wno-error=vla ../configure --prefix=$(readlink -f ../../grub-install)
  (docker)$ make -j$(nproc)
  (docker)$ make install
  ```

- Exit container and prepare boot disk by creating MBR + FAT32 partition.

  ```shell
  $ sudo fdisk /dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0 <<EOF
  o
  n
  p
  1

  w
  EOF

  $ sudo mkfs.vfat -F32 /dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0-part1
  ```

- Install GRUB onto target device. This will a complete GRUB into target
  devices, including MBR, GRUB, and its modules.

  ```shell
  $ sudo mkdir /mnt/boot
  $ sudo mount /dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0-part1 /mnt/boot
  $ cd grub-install
  $ sudo sbin/grub-install --target=i386-pc --modules "part_msdos fat" \
      --boot-directory=/mnt/boot \
      /dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0
  ```

- Build SKL (Secure Kernel Loader) from TrenchBoot and copy it to boot
  partition.

  ```shell
  $ git clone https://github.com/TrenchBoot/secure-kernel-loader

>   $ secure-kernel-loader

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  $ cd secure-kernel-loader
```

Author: Fixed

  $ make
  $ cp skl.bin /mnt/boot/
  ```

> Setup Zephyr build environment. Instructions below are based on Zephyr

Reviewer 3: Why does PoC use Zephyr that doesn't work because of Multiboot1?

Reviewer: @krystian-hebel what we should use? I assume we should at least have basic hands-on experience with given OS to claim anything. Linux in various form is easy, since we used it earlier. Do you have other candidate in mind?

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic @krystian-hebel do we have other candidates for this Zephyr PoC or can we resolve this thread?

Reviewer 3: I would use Linux for PoC section. We have proven that it works in DLME, which is better than proving that Zephyr doesn't work.

Problem with running bootloaders in DLME is that it would require another bootloader that initializes DRTM anyway, at least if we don't want to implement DRTM startup in firmware. What about hypervisors? Xen can be booted through Multiboot2, and it already has support for being started in DLME on AMD platforms.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic We'll take a look at Xen

Reviewer: @macpijan it was already part of TrenchBoot project AFAIK? Maybe @krystian-hebel can say what was last status of Xen as DLME kernel.

Reviewer 3: https://blog.3mdeb.com/2020/2020-10-15-xen-implementation-for-trenchboot/
https://xenbits.xen.org/gitweb/?p=xen.git;a=commit;h=e4283bf38aae6c2f88cdbdaeef0f005a1a5f6c78

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 what you mean by that? Linux as dom0?

Author: @pietrushnic Yes, we need to use Linux as dom0. Instead of running Linux on xen we could as well run just Linux.

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 yeah, that's correct this would make more sense if Xen would be [dom0-less](https://xenbits.xen.org/docs/unstable/features/dom0less.html). I just wonder now what would be benefit of starting Xen as DLME OS in Fobnail use case. Maybe @krystian-hebel, @dpsmith or @andyhhp ?

I believe this would good just for attesting early launch and showing in support table it works, but for future late launch scenario doesn't seem to be good target.

Reviewer 6: > @pietrushnic Yes, we need to use Linux as dom0. Instead of running Linux on xen we could as well run just Linux.

Not necessarily.  Using Xen still allows separating various untrusted components in driver domains.

Reviewer 6: Good point, which is another reason to use a microkernel + a single Linux VM.

Author: > Good point, which is another reason to use a microkernel + a single Linux VM.

@pietrushnic @DemiMarie We would have to split `fobnail-attester` into two parts. One part would run in
Linux VM together with all drivers, except TPM driver. Second part would run as
server directly under microkernel. It would be the `trusted` part with minimal
set of functionality and would be responsible for:

- loading next stage OS into RAM and extending PCRs, this would happen early during mini-OS init. At later stage it would not be possible to load anything else, only boot what is already loaded.
- for loading next stage OS we would use drivers from Linux VM.
- TPM driver would be a basic library linked into this component, possibly the library used by SKL, but extended with additional functionality.
- when next stage is loaded and PCRs are extended `fobnail-attester` would get started inside Linux VM.
- it would communicate with secure component over some kind of socket.
- secure component would implement only those request needed to perform platform provisioning/attestation such as TPM quote, reading EK cert.
- code would have to be verified for correctness to ensure there are no exploitable bugs.

Doing this would ensure that we won't pass attestation and boot something rogue, even if VM is compromised. Secure component ensures that we boot exactly what we have loaded during early init and nothing else.

This would solve `libtss2` problem as there would be no `libtss2`, it would also solve `libcoap` problem because part of attester dealing with network would be running in Linux VM. We still need a way to hand real hardware like (USB and disks) into VM. CAmkES has some VM examples. IIRC it also had some examples with `rumprun` driving real hardware. If CAmkES implements robust enough HW passthrough, the only problem would be that seL4 doesn't have kexec ability.

I think Xen can also be an option. We already know that Xen has HW passthrough, dom0-less mode could be handy. Xen also has kexec support and can replace itself with Linux (according to this [document](http://xenbits.xenproject.org/docs/4.2-testing/misc/kexec_and_kdump.txt)). I'm not sure how this would work without domain-0 - since all domains are unprivileged.

Alternatively we can stick to normal Linux. We can reduce attack surface by removing unneeded drivers, unneeded features of network stack, like IPv6. We can enable exploit mitigation/hardening features both in Linux and `fobnail-attester`. Additionally `fobnail-attester` could be sandboxed (unprivileged user, seccomp?) to ensure it can boot only what has been loaded early.
This is simpler solution, but doesn't provide protection against potential vulnerabilities in USB drivers and network stack.

Author: @DemiMarie I'm not sure whether CAmkES HW passthrough can be configured at runtime, all examples I've seen used static configuration which is platform specific. Another, and the most problem is that seL4 has no AMD-V support. Please see also "seL4 + CAmkES section".

Author: I think we should stick to Xen. It already has good enough hardware passthrough.
Secure component would run as a separate VM. We could use here some unikernel (probably Unikraft), otherwise Secure component itself would have to become a very basic "kernel". Xen contrary to seL4 won't provide us C library, but I think we could write that component in Rust, which already provides `core` library on bare-metal library.
We would have to implement basic TPM driver, basic driver for communicating with Linux VM.

@pietrushnic Would you give some feedback? So that I can update Xen section accordingly.

Reviewer: I think @marmarek is right Xen would be too bloated. One thing that is kind of lost in translation is question if we're talking about late launch or early launch. In first case we need something minimalistic with possibility of implementing various DLME payloads in future I assume in second case we need just bootloader functionality.

Path of the least resistance to prove Fobnail features most likely would be Linux, other options require evaluation of engineering cost. That evaluation will not happen here, but I hope this document would create good enough base to prepare formal documents in 3mdeb.

Author: @pietrushnic 
Do we want to isolate DLME payloads from each other? If so, then seL4 could be of use here or some other kernel.

> Path of the least resistance to prove Fobnail features most likely would be Linux

I agree, Linux would be the easiest, fastest and the most certain way. Other options should be considered experimental.

Reviewer 3: Multiple DLME payloads can't run at the same time. Doing DRTM also breaks whatever OS was running earlier, including its protection mechanisms. That is in fact the main reason to use DRTM - to not depend on previous state.

Reviewer: @krystian-hebel in early launch we don't care. In late launch we care, but right now I don't believe there is any document showing consistent vision how it should work. Flicker show some PoC for that, but I believe whatever we will do here have to be better. That's why I suggest splitting those cases early vs late, right now care mostly about early since this is goal of Fobnail PoC and late launch we can address based on this research as next project/Fobnail PoC productization or even Fobnail v2.

Reviewer 3: No, it still can't run multiple DLMEs simultaneously, even in late launch. Each DRTM stops all execution, on all cores/threads of CPU.

DLME shouldn't be able to mess up memory it isn't expected to access, but it should be protected by code running in DCE. Unless this part is the minimal OS we're talking about, but the rest of document doesn't match this assumption.

Reviewer: > No, it still can't run multiple DLMEs simultaneously, even in late launch. Each DRTM stops all execution, on all cores/threads of CPU.

I don't expect to run multiple DLME simultaneously and not voting for that, since I agree with you. 

But when talking about stopping all execution on all cores the question is how to perform late launch and execute some purposeful DLME payload. All the time I think about Flicker-like applications (DLME payloads), but with better recovery mechanism then it was implemented in their solution. There have to be some path for that in LKML patches, or at leas idea for that in TrenchBoot designer head ( @dpsmith cc). Somehow big corp use late launch, so there is some application for it. I also don't see crash of the system when OS/hypervisor works, so question is how it is really solved in commercial solutions, and why can't do the same? Isn't this some form of OS sleep/resume?

Reviewer: > DLME shouldn't be able to mess up memory it isn't expected to access, but it should be protected by code running in DCE. Unless this part is the minimal OS we're talking about, but the rest of document doesn't match this assumption.

It is late, but maybe we should put an issue to fix that in further version of docuemntation?

Reviewer 3: > Isn't this some form of OS sleep/resume?

Almost. While sleep part is mostly the same, resume happens from a different state. Normally, OS expects devices to be reinitialized after they are powered down, some of that may be performed by firmware. When coming back from DLME, devices may be in unexpected state, and it is possible that the OS drivers won't be able to get them back to usable state. Probably needs testing.

> It is late, but maybe we should put an issue to fix that in further version of docuemntation?

https://github.com/fobnail/docs/issues/35

With that, I consider this discussion as resolved.

Reviewer 2: Thanks

  [Multiboot2](https://github.com/3mdeb/grub/blob/tb_xen/grub-core/loader/multiboot.c#L192)
  but Zephyr has support only for Multiboot1.

- Booting Zephyr in DLME would require updating `slaunch` support in GRUB and
  bringing Multiboot1 support to SKL.

## Summary

* The above report outlines four operating systems that should be considered
  candidates for Fobnail Token interoperability.

* The basic choice is Linux, the operating system based on it is created with
  the use of Yocto Project. All achievements can be reproduced at any time using
  the [meta-fobnail](https://github.com/fobnail/meta-fobnail) layer.

* As part of the report, the seL4, Xous and Zephyr systems were also checked.
  The possibility of running it in DLME and the integration of the
  [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) application
  was checked for each of them.

* The description of an attempt to run Zephyr on PC Engines apu2 in order to
  verify the current state of the system to work with Fobnail Token has been
  included. The effects are described in the [PoC test](#poc-test) section.

* The table below summarises all OSes features described
  [above](#os-requirements).

> | OS      | USB host driver  | USB EEM driver   | Network stack | TPM driver        | OS portability | Bootloader capabilities | C library | Microkernel | CPU Architecture support | Bootable by SKL | Score |

Reviewer 3: I don't know if comparing driver support for mix of microkernels and other types of kernels makes sense. By definition, some things that are drivers in bigger kernels are moved to userspace in microkernels, which may impact scores in this table.

Reviewer 6: Bingo.  seL4 does not (and should not!) have USB support.  That’s the job of userspace.

Reviewer: If we were very strict about apple to apple we will dive in scientific discussion. Extreme precision here would make whole decision process not feasible for size of project. Do you have alternative way to achieve quick summary, that can help make final decision?

Author: Comparison includes userspace drivers available for these microkernels. seL4 has no USB driver available, except this https://github.com/seL4/projects_libs/tree/master/libusbdrivers which is of unknown quality and has support for EHCI only.
Neither does CAmkES have USB drivers.

Reviewer 3: If this is mentioned then yes. Although I am still surprised that USB support is so poor for those microkernels.

Author: @krystian-hebel I added mention, does it solve thread?

Reviewer 3: Solved

| Zephyr  | Yes (+2)         | Yes (+2)         | Yes (+2)      | PoC available (0) | Limited (-1)   | No (0)                  | Yes (+2)  | No (0)      | Good (+1) [^4]           | No (0) [^6]     | 8     |
| Xous    | No (0)           | No (0)           | Yes (+2)      | No (0)            | Limited (-1)   | No (0)                  | No (0)    | Yes (+1)    | RISC-V only (-1)         | No (0)          | 1     |
| seL4    | No (0) [^1]      | No (0) [^2]      | Yes (+2)      | No (0)            | Limited (-1)   | No (0)                  | Yes (+2)  | Yes (+1)    | Good (+1) [^3]           | Yes (+2)        | 7     |
| Linux   | Yes (+2)         | Yes (+2)         | Yes (+2)      | Yes (+2)          | Yes (+1)       | Yes (kexec) (+2)        | Yes (+2)  | No (0)      | Good (+1) [^5]           | Yes (+2)        | 16    |

[^1]: seL4 has an old unmaintained driver with no xHCI support. Better driver is
      available only from Genode.

[^2]: available from Genode only

[^3]: supports x86, ARM and RISC-V

> [^4]: supports x86, ARM RISC-V, SPARC and MIPS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[^4]: supports x86, ARM, RISC-V, SPARC and MIPS
```

Author: Fixed

> [^5]: supports the most of the architectures, much more than any other OS listed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[^5]: supports most of the architectures, much more than any other OS listed
```

Author: Fixed

development took place on this operating system. Therefore, it is important that
the created minimal OS also has an integrated attester application. The main
dependencies of its operation are drivers for USB, USB EEM and TPM, but running
them under Linux will not cause major problems.

### Little Kernel / Trusted Little Kernel

Little Kernel is a small, embedded monolithic kernel that runs on x86, ARM and
RISC-V among others, provides a custom very basic libc. LK focuses on ARM
platforms and lacks drivers for devices typically found in x86 platforms. LK has
been used as a base for aboot (Android bootloader) and
[Fuchsia OS](https://fuchsia.dev/).

Trusted Little Kernel (available at
`https://nv-tegra.nvidia.com/r/3rdparty/ote_partner/tlk.git`, not accessible
through web browser - must be cloned with `git`) is a fork of LK intended to be
run as TEE OS. It is developed by NVIDIA for Tegra platforms, support for all
other platforms has been removed.

#### Running in DLME

LK boots over Multiboot 1 which is not supported by SKL. The problem is similar
to that with Zephyr (see [Zephyr](#running-in-dlme) section for detail). However

> Multiboot2 support could be easily added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiboot2 support could be added.
```

I would avoid judgment at this point, since from my experience those claims are typically not true, but drive price down.

Author: Removed

#### Fobnail integration

Running [fobnail-attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) on LK
would be problematic to say the last:

- LK lacks most drivers including USB host drivers (UHCI, OHCI, EHCI, XHCI),
  USB EEM driver and TPM drivers.

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure why we need those empty lines, please remove those.

Author: Removed

  quality.

- TCP/IP is provided by `minip` library (which is part of LK). Attester depends
  on `libcoap3` which either would have to be ported to `minip` or `minip` would
  have to be integrated with `newlib`.

- LK has no suitable bootloader capabilities.
  [lkboot](https://github.com/littlekernel/lk/tree/master/app/lkboot) could
  serve as reference to develop custom bootloader.

### Fuchsia (Zircon)

[Fuchsia](https://fuchsia.dev) is a general-purpose OS developed by Google. Its
purpose is to replace GNU/Linux in Google products (like Android, Chrome OS)
with Zircon microkernel (used to be known as Magenta) and custom userland.
Fuchsia runs on x86-64 and ARM64. There used to be an
[unofficial](https://github.com/slavaim/riscv-magenta) RISC-V port, however it
has been unmaintained for years. Support for 32-bit architectures was dropped
some time ago.

Zircon is based on LK, however similarities between these two are small and
constantly decreasing. LK is a kernel intended for embedded usage, while Zircon
is a general-purpose microkernel that could compete with Linux.

#### Running in DLME

Historically Zircon used Multiboot 1 for booting. Now it uses ZBI with a UEFI

> bootloader called Gigaboot. Multiboot 1 support is still present, but SKL

Reviewer: Link to Gigaboot?

Author: Added

doesn't support it anyway. See [Zephyr](#running-in-dlme) section above for
details.

#### Fobnail integration

Fuchsia provides a Unix-like environment with musl C library. Network is
available but is no EEM driver, and only XHCI host driver is supported. Since
EHCI is still widely used, this is a major limitation. TPM driver is available
but without `libtss2`.

Zircon has a kexec-like capability which allows to boot another Zircon instance.
This is known as `mexec`.

Following things would have to be done:

- Bring `libtss2` stack to Zircon.

> 

Reviewer: Please remove those empty lines.

Author: Removed

- Bring EEM driver. There is ECM driver available, which could serve as
  reference.

- Bring at least USB EHCI driver, ideally should support UHCI and OHCI too.

- Figure out how to use `mexec` to boot Linux.

## PoC test

Running DLME requires GRUB from TrenchBoot as mainline doesn't have DLME
support. Currently, there is an ongoing discussion how TrenchBoot should be

> integrated into Linux. Unless this is solved no investment in TrenchBoot GRUB2

Reviewer: @arturkow2000 please add link to that discussion or couple links, I'm trying to find references but on LKML comes to mind. There was definitely something wrote by Mattew Garret. @krystian-hebel do you know where to find most recent status of above discussion?

Reviewer 3: https://groups.google.com/g/trenchboot-devel should have copies of all of public discussion in one place. If LKML link is preferred, it should be easy to find using subjects from `trenchboot-devel` list.

Author: Added 3 links

  then -1
- If this is a hard requirement then multiple result by 2

## Different OSs propositions

The research effect is presented below. 4 systems were considered:

* Zephyr
* Xous
* seL4
* Linux

Each of them has a short description, an analysis of the launch in DLME, and the
possibilities and potential problems that will have to be addressed for the
Fobnail Token to be functional.

### Zephyr

Zephyr is a well-known and supported embedded RTOS with a monolithic kernel
written in C. It supports various devices ranging from Cortex-M to x86 CPUs.
It's main benefits are IPv4, CoAP, and USB (including USB EEM) support which are
required for communication with Fobnail token. Other benefits are listed
[here](https://www.zephyrproject.org/benefits/).

#### Running in DLME

Secure launch uses a component called
[SKL](https://github.com/TrenchBoot/secure-kernel-loader) (Secure Kernel Loader)
which is responsible for booting OS in DLME (Zephyr in that case). Zephyr boots
using Multiboot1 but SKL does not support it (only Multiboot2 is supported). For
SKL to be able to boot Zephyr, Zephyr must gain Multiboot2 support.

> Multiboot1 is hard measure due to its tags being scattered around in memory. To

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multiboot1 is hard to measure due to its tags being scattered around in memory. To
```

Author: Fixed

Reviewer 2: I will resolve this thread as the change is small and has been applied.

  ```shell
  default 0
  menuentry "Zephyr (DLME)" {
    slaunch skinit
    slaunch_module /skl.bin
    multiboot /zephyr.elf
  }
  menuentry "Zephyr (no DLME)" {
    multiboot /zephyr.elf
  }
  ```

- Umount disk and sync before unplugging it. There were some problems with
  obtaining working binary, so before booting Zephyr on target platform please
  check whether it boots in Qemu (without DLME). When booting Zephyr you should
  see `Hello World` message on serial console, if Zephyr doesn't output anything
  or if it stuck at `Booting Zephyr` message then something went wrong.

  ```shell
  $ qemu-system-x86_64 -nographic -serial mon:stdio -m 512M -cpu qemu64 \
    -drive format=raw,file=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0
  ```

- Zephyr should normally boot on APU. If DLME variant (from boot menu) is used
  Zephyr will also boot normally. That is because TrenchBoot GRUB executes SKL
  only when using
  [Multiboot2](https://github.com/3mdeb/grub/blob/tb_xen/grub-core/loader/multiboot.c#L192)
  but Zephyr has support only for Multiboot1.

- Booting Zephyr in DLME would require updating `slaunch` support in GRUB and

>   bringing Multiboot1 support to SKL.

Reviewer 3: @arturkow2000 please either remove this or change it to adding MB2 to Zephyr.

Author: Done

could be a problem for Fobnail.

### seL4 + CAmkES

CAmkES provides tools and libraries for quickly writing seL4-native components.
Contrary to `seL4_libs` CAmkES is planned to be formally verified (verification
is in progress).

#### Running in DLME

Since CAmkES is based on seL4, the same restrictions apply. See the section
above for details.

#### Fobnail integration

CAmkES also does not provide many drivers. However it does provide VMM for
virtual machines. Features:

- support for booting Linux kernel
- according to [camkes-vm](https://docs.sel4.systems/projects/camkes-vm/)
  documentation, only 32-bit VMs are supported.
  > The first step is to install ubuntu natively on the cma34cr. It’s currently
  > required that guests of the camkes vm run in 32-bit mode, so install 32-bit
  > ubuntu.
- there is support for hardware passthrough, however it is severely limited and
  it requires manual configuration, including IO port assignment, memory
  mapping, interrupts setup. This is completely not portable and cannot be used
  in this form. Normally, VM config is written in CAmkES specific language, it
  is unknown whether such a config can be generated at runtime or only during

>   build.

Reviewer 6: At least some of these limitations _will_ be fixed as part of an actively funded project for a Qubes-like OS based on seL4.  The config can only be generated during build time, not runtime.  According to the seL4 developers, hardware discovery would severely bloat the microkernel, which is why it was not included there.  Having the hardware discovery code run in userspace reduces the TCB.

Author: @DemiMarie I updated document accordingly to the information you provided.

> According to the seL4 developers, hardware discovery would severely bloat the microkernel, which is why it was not included there. Having the hardware discovery code run in userspace reduces the TCB.

Not everything can be detected in userspace. Some of CPU features must be detected in kernel, for example XSAVE/FXSAVE, which currently is selected at build time and kernel won't boot on CPU that doesn't support XSAVE, similar problem is for VT-x - if we enable VT-x kernel won't boot on CPUs without, probably there are more problems like that.
I hope that when AMD-V supports lands seL4 will be able detect CPU type and use either VT-x or AMD-V. Otherwise we would have to supply 2 kernels, or even more. Also, each kernel needs matching userspace as seL4 Syscall ABI is not stable and it changes between versions and even between various configs.

Reviewer 2: @DemiMarie Could you please take a look at this revised section again? Do you think we have updated it correctly based on your information? Can we then resolve this conversation?

Author: @DemiMarie Could you please take a look at this again? Can we resolve this thread?

Reviewer 6: You do, yes.

Reviewer 2: Thanks

| C library               | [Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) is writen in C |
| Bootable by SKL         | Whether OS can be loaded by TrenchBoot SKL without SKL or OS modification      |

These are another features which are taken into account (soft requirements).

| Feature                  | Description                                                               |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Microkernel              | Microkernels are more secure and are preferred                            |
| OS portability           | Required to avoid rebuilding minimal OS for each device                   |
| CPU Architecture support | OS supported architectures, mostly we consider x86, ARM, RISC-V and POWER |

### OS score counting

The table at the bottom of this document contains summary of features of all
OSes together with theirs scores. Each score is computed using the following
rules

- If feature is present then +1
- If feature is not present then 0, or if feature would be hard to implement
  then -1

> - If this is a hard requirement then multiple result by 2

Reviewer: Scoring explanation should be neat the table.

Reviewer 2: I move the whole scoring section to summary.

## Different OSs propositions

The research effect is presented below. 8 systems were considered

* Zephyr
* Xous
* seL4 (with and without CAmkES)
* Genode
* Linux
* Little Kernel / Trusted Little Kernel
* Fuchsia

> * Xen

Reviewer: Please make this list linked to sections.

  LAPIC remapped using `IA32_APIC_BASE` Zephyr will break.

- APIC mode (xAPIC vs x2APIC) is selected when building Zephyr and cannot be
  detected at runtime. Zephyr may not boot if it has different APIC mode set
  than firmware has.

#### Fobnail integration

Zephyr provides most of the drivers needed for integration

- USB hub drivers
- USB EEM driver
- Network stack with IPv4 and CoAP support

TPM driver is missing, there is a fairly recent
[PoC implementation](https://github.com/drandreas/zephyr-tpm2-poc) of TPM2
stack, but it is intended for embedded devices and supports SPI only.

Zephyr provides good support for standard C library (newlib), which should
simplify [Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
porting.

### Xous

Xous is a microkernel-based OS written in Rust, currently in Alpha state. Xous
is used as a secure microkernel for [Betrusted](betrusted.io) device and is
focused on RISC-V, which right now is the only architecture supported. However,
x86 already contains
[dummy implementation](https://github.com/betrusted-io/xous-core/blob/30b82b25b100e958790973c129dc49e1acca79ec/kernel/src/arch/x86_64.rs)
which probably will be extended someday.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Change added

usage as secure bootloader.

#### Running in DLME

It should be runnable, however due to microkernel nature all programs run in
unprivileged mode which complicates booting of the target OS. seL4 would have to
gain kexec-like abilities. seL4 developers are
[willing](https://github.com/seL4/seL4/issues/832#issuecomment-1114385689) to
add kexec support.

#### Fobnail integration

seL4 provides virtually no drivers, except a few drivers listed
[here](https://docs.sel4.systems/projects/available-user-components.html#device-drivers).
According to the page linked above, `libusbdrivers` is inactive and lacks XHCI
support. seL4 has basic support for an old version of musl C library (v1.1.16).

Using seL4 would require a significant amount of work
- Extending USB drivers
- Implementing USB EEM driver
- Implementing TPM driver
- Porting [Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester)
- seL4 runs all processes in unprivileged mode, so the kernel itself would have
  to be modified to allow booting of another kernel

[Genode](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode) can provide many of the required
drivers. See the section below for details.

> CAmkES provides tools for writing seL4-native components, it also has VMM

Reviewer: What is CAmkES, some link also would be useful.

Reviewer 2: Link added on the first CAmkES appearance

support for running virtual machines. Contrary to Genode CAmkES does not provide
drivers, but VMs may provide them. However this requires virtualization and seL4
currently supports it only on Intel CPUs. See the section below for more details.

### Genode

[Genode](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode) is a framework for creating
custom, specialized OSes. It can work on various kernels/hypervisors, including
seL4 and Linux. It provides many drivers, including USB drivers (including
`usb-net` driver which should handle USB EEM) and a network stack. When running
on Linux all components are sandboxed with seccomp, however it should be noted
that Linux drivers are used. For other kernels Genode provides sandboxed
drivers.

#### Running in DLME

Whether Genode can run in DLME depends on the choosen kernel, however we are

> interested mainly in seL4. Please see seL4 section above for details.

Reviewer: Linking would be useful

Reviewer 2: Added here and in the next `Running in DLME` section which also refer to the one from seL4.

#### Fobnail integration

TPM driver would have to be ported to Genode. Underlying kernel must have kexec
abilities and Genode must have component capable of invoking kexec. USB and
EEM drivers should work out-of-the-box.

Genode's seL4 support is considered to be in healthly state (see
[this](https://github.com/genodelabs/genode/issues/4480#issuecomment-1108525737)
comment). But it should be noted Genode with seL4 has not been used outside the
lab so far.

Also, it should be noted that Genode license (AGPLv3) is very restrictive and it

> could be a problem for the Fobnail Project.

Reviewer: Why in other cases we don't talk about licenses?

Reviewer 2: In this case we added it from the review section (https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26#discussion_r857764027). Should we add license as hard or soft requirements and think about them in other OSes?

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR always, every software analysis should consider or at least mention license. This is fundamental part of software development craftsmanship.

Reviewer 2: Licenses added in [0157aad](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0157aad6fef7b0974587b919f0748211b5e7dc91) for every system and to the table as a requirement, score added in [3f13874](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/3f1387424ee2a95ac3d6c909a585cb146dc3349e)

### seL4 + CAmkES

CAmkES provides tools and libraries for quickly writing seL4-native components.
Contrary to `seL4_libs` CAmkES is planned to be formally verified (verification
is in progress).

#### Running in DLME

Since CAmkES is based on seL4, the same restrictions apply. See the section
above for details.

#### Fobnail integration

CAmkES also does not provide many drivers. However it does provide VMM for

> virtual machines. Features

Reviewer 2: Change applied

unreliable because:

* It won't work if Fobnail Token isn't already plugged in.
* It won't work if Fobnail Token is plugged out and back in.

Hotplug detection and interface setup could be implemented in
[Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) through Netlink.

### Linux with Go userspace

[u-root](https://github.com/u-root/u-root) provides an easy way to deploy Go
programs as standalone initramfs images. It is used by the
[LinuxBoot](https://www.linuxboot.org/) project for creating small Linux distro
that acts as bootloader for other OSes (through kexec).

#### Running in DLME

Since we are still running Linux, there are no problems here.

#### Fobnail integration

[Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) is written in C,
and it rather doesn't make sense to integrate it with Go userland. Also, it
should be noted that `u-root` built initramfs contains only executable - all Go
modules are linked into a single binary. Unless we want to rewrite Fobnail
Attester there is no point in using userspace that was designed be Go-only.
Rewriting Fobnail Attester in Go may give benefits of producing less vurnelable

> code.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be possible to Fobnail Attester as init? Do we need anything else from userspace? I think `kexec` can be run directly from attester.

@krystian-hebel ?

#### Fobnail integration

Fuchsia provides a Unix-like environment with musl C library. Network is
available but there is no EEM driver, and only XHCI host driver is supported.
Since EHCI is still widely used, this is a major limitation. TPM driver is
available but without `libtss2`.

Zircon has a kexec-like capability which allows to boot another Zircon instance.
This is known as `mexec`.

Following things would have to be done:

* Bring `libtss2` stack to Zircon.
* Bring EEM driver. There is ECM driver available, which could serve as
  reference.
* Bring at least USB EHCI driver, ideally should support UHCI and OHCI too.
* Figure out how to use `mexec` to boot Linux.

### Xen

Xen is a bare-metal hypervisor available on x86 and ARM. It is able to run Linux
in a paravirtualized environment. Xen contains only drivers absolutely necessary
for hypervisor and VM to boot. Control over most of the hardware is handed to
the first VM known as [Dom0](https://wiki.xenproject.org/wiki/Dom0). Usuallly
Linux runs in Dom0, there are other OSes which also support running in Dom0
(BSD, Solaris), however there is no advantage of using them over Linux. Xen also

> has ability to run in dom0-less mode - bootloader provides VM images and Xen

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR maybe let's link dom0-less documentation

Reviewer 2: Added [0157aad](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0157aad6fef7b0974587b919f0748211b5e7dc91#diff-76336fb0328e2063bb2c8b183eb9bcf50d8be89da43f108025b2c0624b8f0d6fR504)

starts VMs on their own (see section below for details).

#### Running in DLME

Xen is supported by Trenchboot's GRUB and can run without any modifications.
See [xen-in-dlme.md](xen-in-dlme.md) for demo.

#### Integration with Fobnail

Domain 0 less mode eliminates need for trusted VM. Also, since Xen itself is
responsible for booting multiple VMs there is no need for tools that manage Xen
(which don't work on any OS). Fobnail Attester could be integrated in a similar
way that with CAmkES based VM (see CAmkES section above for details). The main
difference would be that the secure component would be a separate VM.

Unfortunatelly, Xen is bloated and it doesn't meet the "minimal" requirement.

> This is a major problem.

Reviewer: So, last resort it makese some sense for early launch, but completly doesn't make sense for future late launch - maybe let's phrase that conclusion correctly.

Reviewer 2: Added [dd5f399](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/dd5f399e272e8288493852f605c41b29047c4d16)

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR you probably linked different commit, since I see not connection

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic yes, should be this one [0157aad](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0157aad6fef7b0974587b919f0748211b5e7dc91#diff-76336fb0328e2063bb2c8b183eb9bcf50d8be89da43f108025b2c0624b8f0d6fR522), sorry

> ## Zephyr PoC test

Reviewer: PoC test should be separated into other makrdown files, linked somewhere here. Logically experiements does not belong to above analysis.

Reviewer 2: Moved to seperate doc [cdb888f](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/cdb888f92ba674a5c52d1d226a10c03b75cce94b)

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR it has to be linked somewhere.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic yes, linked here [0157aad](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0157aad6fef7b0974587b919f0748211b5e7dc91#diff-76336fb0328e2063bb2c8b183eb9bcf50d8be89da43f108025b2c0624b8f0d6fR112). I should point it out right away

Reviewer: I see it is linked in menu. I'm not sure if it is enough since there should be reference also in main doc that this and other PoC were performed.

In addition to conducting the theoretical analysis, it was decided to include a
test report of one of the operating systems in order to verify the information
presented. The choice fell on Zephyr.

Running DLME requires GRUB from TrenchBoot as mainline doesn't have DLME
support. Currently, there is an ongoing discussion how TrenchBoot should be
integrated into Linux - see the following links:

* https://groups.google.com/g/trenchboot-devel/c/-RxTtan5H3I/m/vU-yp5kHAgAJ,
* https://groups.google.com/g/trenchboot-devel/c/QLMg0r4XTcs/m/YrN2bX3PDQAJ,

> * https://groups.google.com/g/trenchboot-devel/c/6ilwQUkwt9w/m/dpyriBCHAgAJ.

Reviewer: I don't like the way it is linked, please provide title of patch series as link name and hide url which say nothing about the content behind.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in seperate doc [cdb888f](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/cdb888f92ba674a5c52d1d226a10c03b75cce94b#diff-277d2cf31e610e3342b956bc2893797b89598425b3fef709288e9cadd09c60d1R11)

  }
  menuentry "Zephyr (no DLME)" {
    multiboot /zephyr.elf
  }
  ```

* Umount disk and sync before unplugging it.
  > There were some problems with obtaining working binary, so before booting
    Zephyr on target platform please check whether it boots in QEMU (without
    DLME). When booting Zephyr you should see `Hello World` message on serial
    console, if Zephyr doesn't output anything or if it stuck at
    `Booting Zephyr` message then something went wrong.

  ```shell
  $ qemu-system-x86_64 -nographic -serial mon:stdio -m 512M -cpu qemu64 \
    -drive format=raw,file=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-TS-RDF5_SD_Transcend_000000000039-0\:0
  ```

* Zephyr should normally boot on APU, if DLME variant (from boot menu) is used
  Zephyr will also boot normally - that is because TrenchBoot GRUB executes SKL
  only when using
  [Multiboot2](https://github.com/3mdeb/grub/blob/tb_xen/grub-core/loader/multiboot.c#L192)
  but Zephyr has support only for Multiboot1.

* Booting Zephyr in DLME would require extending it with Multiboot2 support.

## Summary

* The above report outlines 8 operating systems that should be considered
  candidates for Fobnail Token interoperability.

> 

Reviewer: I don't see point of empty line between bullets, I'm pretty sure it would look bad in mkdocs

Reviewer 2: Fixed [0157aad](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0157aad6fef7b0974587b919f0748211b5e7dc91#diff-76336fb0328e2063bb2c8b183eb9bcf50d8be89da43f108025b2c0624b8f0d6fL645)

| Bootloader Capabilities | Required to boot target OS                                                     |
| C library               | [Fobnail Attester](https://github.com/fobnail/fobnail-attester) is writen in C |
| Bootable by SKL         | Whether OS can be loaded by TrenchBoot SKL without SKL or OS modification      |

> | License                 | Whether given OS is open sourced can be fully used on embedded devices         |

Reviewer: @TomaszAIR this sound weird, maybe you mean:

```
Whether OS use open-source license, and if licese used is applicable for embedded market
```

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic I also did not like that description but I was not able to come up with something nicer. Thanks. Added here [0964cb8](https://github.com/fobnail/docs/pull/26/commits/0964cb82943ee643e07d5fe643620ff5d040275e)
